What is DataLad? Everyone needs data! Data are
indispensable for learning, understanding, and
decision making. Working with data responsibly for
the benefit of our communities and the environment
requires us to bring together diverse expertise
and to share findings in a way that fosters trust
in the facts that we base our
actions on. But how can we achieve
this in a world that overwhelms us with
information and limitless possibilities?
Here DataLad can help by recording and documenting
the collaborative process of distilling knowledge
from data, such that it becomes more accessible
and ultimately verifiable. Any investigation
is built on facts. Many of them are digital.
They come in text documents, program code,
and binary files such as images. In our connected
world, files cannot only be on our own computers,
but also at many different cloud
services. Wherever data lives,
DataLad can keep track of them to do this! It
provides a data structure, the data set. It can
reference the precise identity and availability
of ANY digital object. Importantly, it can record
how exactly data and program code are used
to derive the results of an investigation.
DataLad can clone a dataset to another location
on a different computer. Like the original dataset
each clone is completely self-contained.
The information in a dataset can be used
to retrieve all data at the precise version
that is needed, either from the internet
or from other clones of a dataset. The process
records in a dataset enable reproducing results
by a collaborator and make it possible to
verify exactly what was done to get them.
Dataset content looks just like any other
directory on a computer. But datasets can
also be nested to form reusable modular units
that can be assembled into bigger projects.
With these basic principles DataLad can
support a diversity of tasks, whether that is
editing a video clip by yourself or collaborative
research on the world's most powerful computers.
Bringing structure to the data flood is no easy
task. But we are a community of people working
hard to make the tools more accessible every day.
Online training resources offer a convenient start
to working with DataLad. A comprehensive handbook
is your guide for a deep dive into all the
features DataLad has to offer. DataLad is free
and open source software. Anyone is free to use
for any purpose. It has been adapted to
facilitate scientific collaborations,
working with the world's largest health data
sets, and to enable reproducible research. [Music]
Join us to help better
serve even more communities!